Title: Extremely Mello

----

Text: 

(image: dsc07341.jpg class:large)

The Museum of Contemporary Art Chicago, like many museums, displays exhibition titles and texts on the wall using adhesive-backed vinyl. Vinyl text is typically installed in one block to ensure that each line is spaced and leveled as the designer intended. This is not true of the removal method for vinyl graphics. When an exhibition closes, the museum’s preparators uninstall the texts by removing the letters and punctuation one by one.

The interest in reordering language and the methods for doing so have precedents in the fine arts. In 1966, the British artist Tom Phillips began drawing, collaging, and painting over the pages of the 1892 novel “A Human Document” by W. H. Mallock. Inspired by the cut-ups (sentences pasted together from disparate sources) of William S. Burroughs and Bryon Gysin, Phillips began to form new sentences in the book by connecting words through the rivers of the preexisting text. From 1966 to 1970, Phillips constructed a loose narrative centered on a character named Toge, whose appearance was only made when Mallock used the words “together” or “altogether” in “A Human Document.” Phillips published this “treated Victorian novel” under the name A Humument in 1970. To the conditioned reader, the meandering phrases brought together by his treatment cause the visual artwork to recede. The space around the words grows into an area of rest, and the reader is given a gift: the ability to reimagine the way in which a sentence can be read.

I believe the impulse to construct sentences or sentence fragments from moveable letterforms is common; rascally passersby rearrange marquee letters and households display loose, magnetic alphabets on their refrigerators. There is power in the act of reordering letters to compose new messages. Many MCA preparators—some of whom are artists themselves—are of this tribe. I was made aware of this in April of 2014 when I walked by a recently closed exhibition and was met with the words “Extremely Mello Museum of Contemporary Art Chicago. ®” where the show’s wall text used to be. The MCA’s preparators had composed a message by strategically removing vinyl letters from the old title. With a little nudging, a preparator named Kit Rosenberg began emailing photos of these compositions….

Conversation between Bryce Wilner and Kit Rosenberg
B: The things you’re interacting with are these sacred objects, which are put on view in this really specific context. That’s what amazed me when I first came across an altered wall text that somebody had been doing. Is it something that the broader population of MCA preparators do? Maybe just a handful of them?

K: There are a few. I got introduced to it by Matt Viler (sp?). I just walked by and he was picking off wall text and had made this poem, and it was pretty juvenile. A lot of them can be pretty juvenile.

B: Yeah, whenever people are faced with a situation wherein they can draw something that is viewed by the public, the overarching theme is generally perverse. 

Even though there is a crudity to anyone wanting to interact with text in that way, what’s amazing to me is that, while the text is quite temporary, it’s on the wall of a gallery beside an Alexander Calder or an Andy Warhol piece. And it’s something that people are going to pass when they walk toward the Andy Warhol gallery. It’s totally present, and it’s a creative gesture that’s produced by this force of the museum which is supposed to be invisible: the preparators. It’s evidence left behind that somebody not only installed this text, but that somebody is thinking creatively or critically when they’re deconstructing it.

K: A friend of mine was telling me recently that the mark of a good film director is that while you’re watching the film, you don’t think about the fact that you’re watching it. You get lost in it. And I think when you go to a museum, most places try to make it seem as though the exhibitions kind of appear as if by magic.

B: Certainly nobody in line to enter the MCA today was aware that you were up until 6:00 am getting the show ready.

K: Yeah, so with the wall text, it’s a little subversive thing. I’m skeptical about the number of people who actually read the wall text. They’ll maybe glance at the first few sentences, and then look at whatever they’re supposed to see, and then move on.

B: The phrase “supposed to see” is interesting. It seems reasonable that you’re supposed to look at the altered wall text because somebody has gone to the trouble to form a sentence out of this text that was clearly written by a curator or an artist but has been reworked in a funny, but also profound way. Do you feel as though the wall text alterations stem from literary, artistic, or musical influences? 

K: For sure. I love music and have studied it for a long time. My grandmother was really into the avant grade music of her time, like musique concrète, collage music and found sounds. My grandparents had a player piano in their house. My brother and I lived with my grandparents for years. With the player piano, we’d step on these bellows, and it would make this scroll with all these little holes punched in it. The holes would pass through this actuator that would activate the keys. I had a blast using that. My grandmother thought that, if I was interested in how it worked, I’d be interested in producing sound pieces myself from scrolls of blank paper and a hole punch. I was a little kid punching random holes in this scroll of paper and the music sounded like hell.

B: I would love to listen to that music.

K: I really responded to that kind of thing, and through those experiences discovered John Cage and the music and text he was making using the I Ching and chance, which lead me to tone poetry.

B: Are these things that cross your mind when you pull apart a text about Andy Warhol?

K: Definitely. You’re pulling it apart and the selection of words that you have to work with becomes less and less and less. And those constraints become more important and meaningful. I need that. If somebody says “Make a drawing,” I’m going to be lost in thought for a long time. But if somebody says “Draw a rat, or Christmas lights,” it’s really freeing. I think, with the wall texts, you’ve got these words on the wall, and it can be any number of things, but the outline is there in front of you.

B: To me it’s a very beautiful gesture that you can produce something simply by the act of removal. It makes me think of the Michelangelo quotation, “In every block of marble I see a statue as plain as though it stood before me.” But with text, it’s left a bit more up to chance.

K: Right. So Michelangelo looks at the slab of marble and sees the figure within it. I can’t speak for other people, but when I’m picking vinyl, I’ll read the text block first. I’ll search for words that might be good combinations, and I’ll see potential in it. As you’re picking at it, it can change into different things, but it’s not like casting die or picking only the fifth word from each line, which isn’t a bad strategy. That could lead to great things, it’s just not how I work [laughs]. I don’t mean for it to sound like I take it that seriously!

B: Well, it’s not to say that you’d put this in a solo show, but I think this does speak to a broader creative practice in a way.

K: Yeah, for sure. I think most people need that creative outlet. I think when a lot of preparators are picking vinyl, they look for that potential. Sometimes it’s there and sometimes it’s not. I’m sure other people approach it in a much more regimented way that yields equally interesting results. There’s one person who picks off all the letters and just leaves the punctuation so there are just semicolons, periods, quotation marks left on the wall. It looks like this op art sort of piece, and they’re really beautiful.


B: This places it almost in a concrete poetry context; dealing with form and spacing. That’s really amazing.

K: It’s really nice, formally. And it’s born out of utility. Punctuation is a bitch to remove because it’s so small. He goes for the letters first, and they’re relatively easy to remove, and then you’re left with this field of little dots.

B: It hadn’t crossed my mind that there are certain aspects of typography that are simply more difficult to remove than others!

K: Yeah, it’s really just out of necessity for some people. Different people approach it in different ways. I like to take a paragraph and just see what I can say. I try not to rearrange letters. Some people do. I don’t think it’s any worse, but I personally like to let the things exist as they were with some of the original context removed. 

B: And these things are in a museum, this canonized place where we’re supposed to see things that have a stamp of cultural approval. The things that you and your colleagues are doing that leave behind a bunch of punctuation marks on the wall exist on the same elevation as something that has been cleared by critics, artists, and curators.

K: Preparators are behind the scenes and are able to interact with art in unique ways. We can do something small to play with the notion of the museum as an exclusive beacon of scholarship. We’re all looking to have new experiences. Altering wall texts allows us to do that. I don’t think any of us are trying to shock people, but it makes it more interesting for us to look at these things in relation to the artwork it once supported.

Different curators, couriers, and artists who walk through shows stumble upon text pieces that the preparators have done, and they stop and take notice. It leads to a deeper connection between us and other staff in the museum. And it’s fun to see the public walk by and scratch their heads.

I think people are curious. Language is finite, and we’re bound by the words and letters that we have, but you cannot go through life not wanting to explore the possibilities of those things. I think play is a serious thing. It’s important to explore these relationships in a noncommittal way. In some ways, the galleries are a perfect venue for this. There’s text there and it needs to be removed. And it’s public [laughs].

----

Author: Bryce Wilner

----

Type: article

----

Postimage: ah02-cover.png

----

Issue: 1

----

Featured: 1

----

Date: 

----

Coverimage: dsc07341.jpg