Title: Art in Transit: “Carrying Case for Andy Warhol Pillow"

----

Text: 

In the sixties, artists took art on the road. The newly global horizons of contemporary art paralleled seismic shifts in the economy, as developed nations underwent a fraught transition from a manufacturing base to the multinational marketplace of ideas we know today.1 Amidst these transformations, artists found themselves trafficking in increasingly “dematerialized” goods: photo-documentation and other inexpensive and portable carriers for timely concepts. In many cases, they also started acting as their own art handlers. Cheap air travel promised to shrink the turnaround from conception to exhibition—provided that objects to be displayed were sufficiently lightweight to qualify as carry-on.

(image: carrying.png class:medium)

Working at the geographic margins of the established art system, Canadian conceptual artist Iain Baxter (b. 1936; who legally changed his name to IAIN BAXTER& in 2005) was early to recognize and exploit these features of the contemporary turn. Working in tandem with fellow Washington State alumnus John Friel (1938-1971) under the anonymous handle “IT,”2 he devised punning variations on name-brand works of contemporary art pulled straight from the latest issues of Art in America and Artforum. More than an exercise in neo-Dadaist one-upmanship, the inflated “copies” of IT advanced a canny meta-commentary on the increasingly mobile condition of commodities in a knowledge economy.3 “Living in Vancouver,” the artist reflects, “I knew that working with inflated materials was paramount to the idea that you can make an exhibition anywhere. That notion’s become central to how a lot of artists work today.” An entire exhibition of objects could be packed into a travel bag—a proposition for which Baxter’s plasticated contribution to the Dorothy Cameron-curated centennial event in Toronto, Sculpture ’67, served as proof of concept: “A whole show came out of a suitcase,” the artist recalls. As ingenious experiments in portable art, Baxter’s inflatable objects were the immediate precursors to the N.E. Thing Co.’s pioneering use of Telex and telecopier technologies to facilitate instantaneous transmission of its conceptual inventory, from the Company’s remote corporate headquarters in British Columbia, to art capitals around the globe.

(image: pillow.png)

Carrying Case for Andy Warhol Pillow (1966) condenses themes of appropriation and travel into a comic meditation on the paradoxical objecthood of even the airiest Conceptual art. The Case literally “bags” one of Andy Warhol’s iconic Silver Clouds,4 exhibited for the first time at Leo Castelli’s New York gallery in April, 1966. A technologically ambitious collaboration between Warhol and Bell Labs engineer and Experiments in Art and Technology (E.A.T.) founder Billy Klüver, Silver Clouds injected space-age materials with the trademark levity of Pop art. In striking contrast to the palpable techno-utopianism of Warhol and Klüver’s joint venture, BAXTER& recalls that, “I wanted to create a case that was the aesthetic opposite [of Warhol’s Clouds]. I chose a sloppy muslin material, and dyed it a dark green. And it had a grotty plastic handle sewn on top.” Baxter’s conspicuous craft and ungainly materials are forceful reminders of the manual labour incidental to even the most dematerialized Conceptual art.

But it would be misleading to read Carrying Case for Andy Warhol Pillow as the retrenchment of imperiled ideals of masculinity and craftsmanship that the foregoing dialogue with Warhol could imply. It is important to recognize the sources of this work, and related acts of bagging, rather, in Baxter’s simultaneous exploration of wearable vinyl fashions that similarly turned conventional understandings of dematerialization inside out. Karen Rowden, a one-time student of Baxter’s who also collaborated with environmental artist Evelyn Roth, sewed Carrying Case for Andy Warhol Pillow. Roth’s theatrical “wearables” were showcased alongside the “Iain Baxter Collection” as part of a 1968 fashion double bill at the Burnaby Art Gallery, “Make Your Own Fashion Statement.” BAXTER& recalls that,

I just wanted to have fun finding a way to extend the idea of fashion. I liked how if you went to a function, you’d take over the room. The sleeves were like huge bats’ wings. But there was also this kind of erotic overtone. And then the Warhol thing, it was just an automatic thing to do. It’s all interwoven with fashion.

Much as the pneumatic metaphor is operative in IT’s copies as a punning reference to the oftentimes-inflationary valuation of contemporary art, the wearables simultaneously deflate gendered narratives of the heroic (male) artist through the implied risk of untimely detumescence.

If Baxter’s ludicrously bubble-like wearables transform the body into a ready-made carrier for mobile art, IT’s Carrying Case for Andy Warhol Pillow invites embodied activation by an itinerant handler. But its tacit dialogue with fashion equally connects Carrying Case to IT’s parallel critique of contemporary art and its commercial channels of dissemination as the instruments of a fickle fashion system. With typical ambivalence, IT’s portrait of the artist as art handler simultaneously celebrates and casts doubts upon the newly mobile status of creators in a global knowledge economy of fashionable spectacle.

----

Author: Adam Lauder

----

Issue: 1

----

Type: article

----

Postimage: pillow-cover.png